---
title: Philosophy of Failure
categories:
- Mindset
excerpt: |
  Failure is an inevitable part of life, yet it’s often perceived as a negative endpoint rather than a valuable learning experience. Understanding the nuances of failure, both philosophically and psychologically, can transform how we approach setbacks and help us emerge stronger. Let's delve into the layers of failure and explore how we can shift our perspective to harness its potential.
image: "https://picsum.photos/2560/600?image=733"
---

> Failure is something everyone experiences, but how we view and deal with it can make all the difference. Let’s break down failure into simple terms and explore how it impacts us both philosophically and psychologically.

## What is Failure ?

- **Basic Definition:**
  - Failure is the situation when methods and outcomes do not align.

- **Society Definition:**
  - **Materialistic View:** Eg. Ask career advice from elders, and they may recommend government jobs due to the additional facilities and respect in society beyond just the salary.

- **Modernity Definition:**
  - **Consumption View:** Eg. You should look rich even if you're not!

## Psychology of Failure

- **Rejection Reflection:**
  - Why does it hurt so much? --> Comparison, validation, appreciation.
  - People don't see you as they saw you before, so in your mind, your newer version feels lesser than your older version.

- **Failure Hangover:**
  - Your mind wants to figure out the lesson from it (which causes long stress/depression); different questions keep coming up in your mind.

- **Instructive Nature of Failure:**
  - Every time you're in the pain of failure --> "Keep your eyes open! There’s a lesson in there," and you're seeing the world in hyper-reality.

- **Unsolved Puzzle:**
  - Ask yourself questions.
  - Lesson learned for upcoming encounters.

- **The Last Day Paradox:**
  - You consider that you're no longer successful because you think today is the last day.

- **Learned Helplessness:**
  - Every time you fail, you think that this pain must be avoided, so the next time your subconscious mind keeps telling you that you're going to fail again.
  - And you’re not convinced, and the voice becomes stronger than before.
  - When you win --> Serotonin increases in the mind = increased chance of winning.
  - When you lose --> Serotonin decreases in the mind = increased chance of failing.

## On Big Failure

- **Loss of Instincts:** You are no longer in a condition to handle yourself.

- **Your Base Reality Collapses:** You don't know how to see yourself or the world.

- **Self-Doubt:** You let other people into your head; in short, you're brainwashed.

- **Socially Induced Self-Alienation:** Everybody leaves you, even your family members, and you’re alone now.

## Mind-Altering Perspective

- **You Choose What You Fail At:**
  - Failing in the process is different from failing in outcomes.
  - Desired outcomes based on societal expectations are not necessarily failures.

- **Asymmetry of Success:**
  - Focus on the basics.
  - Eg. You don't know the way to your friend's house, so:
    - Every time you ask people in the middle of the way about the landmark --> failure.
    - Your vehicle condition, driving skills --> basics.

- **Build a Comfortable Failure Zone:**
  - Keep enough cash in your pocket.
  - Stay surrounded by people who love you --> family, friends.

- **Antifragile:**
  - Every time you fail, ask yourself: "How do I make this failure turn me antifragile?"
  - "How do I make the best out of what I’ve got?"

- **The Balanced Mindset:**
  - Try as you mean to succeed.
  - Fail as you mean to fail.


## Conclusion
> Failure isn’t just an end; it’s a chance to learn and grow. By understanding its various aspects and shifting your perspective, you can turn setbacks into stepping stones for success. Embrace failure as a valuable part of your journey and keep moving forward.

### References

[The Philosophy and Psychology of Failure: A Guide to Bouncing Back](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MzV-hqup0Ok)

